---
layout: post
title: gulp
class: gulp
date: 2014-06-13 00:00:00
---

Today we're going to discuss some tools that can improve your front-end
workflow. These can help for the back-end as well, but today we're going to
focus on what we can do on the front-end.

## Workflow

What's your workflow look like right now? It should look like this:

1. Write test code
1. Run JSHint
1. Run tests, make sure they fail
1. Write code to get tests passing
1. Run JSHint
1. Run tests, make sure they pass
1. Review your changes
1. Commit your changes

That's a lot of work. It's a lot of switching from your text editor to your
terminal and re-running commands. More likely, you've gotten lazy. Your
workflow probably looks like:

1. Write test code
1. Run tests, make sure they fail
1. Write code to get tests passing
1. Run tests, make sure they pass
1. Review your changes
1. Commit your changes

You're leaving out JSHint entirely. Are you that good at JavaScript that you
make no mistakes now? :)

### Automation

Wouldn't it be great if we could make this happen automatically? Our workflow
could be:

1. Write test code & watch tests fail (no action required)
1. Write code to get tests passing & watch tests pass (no action required)
1. Review your changes
1. Commit your changes

Enter build tools. This is one area where things are still developing, so there
are a lot of options available. We'll look at [gulp][gulp], but you'll also
hear people talk about [Grunt][grunt] and [Broccoli][broccoli] (among others).

## More Tools

### Minification

So you've written a lot of JavaScript. How much? What about all the other stuff
you're using? jQuery? Lo-dash or Underscore? Some jQuery plugins? It may not
seem like much, but every time you type `myVariableName`, there's an
opportunity to shorten the name.

The de facto minification tool of today is [UglifyJS][uglify]. Of course, there
are a few others. Google's [Closure Compiler][closure-compiler] and Yahoo's
[YUI Compressor][yui-compressor] have been losing popularity to UglifyJS.

{% highlight bash %}
$ npm install -g uglifyjs
$ wc -l file.js
     314 file.js
$ cat file.js | wc -c
    8441
$ uglifyjs file.js | wc -c
    5580
$ uglifyjs file.js -c -m | wc -c
    4113
{% endhighlight %}

The `-c` option stands for _compress_ which enables the UglifyJS compressor.
The `-m` option stands for _mangle_ which causes UglifyJS to rename variables
that it considers safe.

Usually web servers will also use GZip compression when it's supported by the
browser making the request, so you'll end up with more savings. This is
automatic, but look at the total savings (81%) on this 314 line JS file:

{% highlight bash %}
$ uglifyjs file.js -c -m | gzip | wc -c
    1595
{% endhighlight %}


<aside>
**Source Maps**

Minification produces JavaScript that won't allow you to diagnose problems in
your code. Tools like CoffeeScript have the same problem. The browser is
reading code that's an alteration of what you originally wrote.

Source maps allow the browser to translate what it's interpreting, minified
JavaScript, for example back to the original code. We won't touch on this much
because you'll use minification only for deployment at this point.
</aside>

### Browserify

Wouldn't it be nice if we could use `requrie` in the browser? Browserify
allows us to do just that.

### Sass

We touched on [Sass][sass] during the mini-project. Today we'll learn what
Sass offers us over plain CSS.

There's also a tool called [Less][less]. The two tools are very similar, and
are both widely used.

Here's some simple CSS:

{% highlight css %}
.error {
  font-weight: bold;
  background-color: #f33;
  color: #fff;
}
.error a { color: #fbb; }
.error a:hover { color: #fff; }
{% endhighlight %}

In Sass you can nest rules:

<section class="sass">
{% highlight css %}
.error {
  font-weight: bold;
  background-color: #f33;
  color: #fff;

  a { color: #fbb; }
  a:hover { color: #fff; }
}
{% endhighlight %}
</section>

Even more nesting:

<section class="sass">
{% highlight css %}
.error {
  font-weight: bold;
  background-color: #f33;
  color: #fff;

  a {
    color: #fbb;
    &:hover { color: #fff; }
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}
</section>

### Connect

Connect is a simple HTTP server that can be relatively easily configured. Using
it will allow us a little more flexibility in the way we work.

For instance, we can create URLs relative to the server root just like we would
want to when deploying a application.

### Live Reload

Live reload makes it so that as we change files, we can actually have the web
browser automatically refresh so that we don't need to do it manually. This
won't help you with everything, but it will help a lot when you're styling
things.


## Gulp

Gulp has plugins to handle almost all of these tasks. Since everyone's build
will look slightly different, the community recommends sharing _recipes_ for
how to configure certain pieces.

It's all just JavaScript, but it can become pretty large quickly. We'll work
from an existing example and really just start to learn what it's like to use
this type of tool.


[sass]: http://sass-lang.com
[less]: http://lesscss.org
[gulp]: http://gulpjs.com
[grunt]: http://gruntjs.com
[broccoli]: https://github.com/joliss/broccoli
[uglify]: https://github.com/mishoo/UglifyJS
[closure-compiler]: https://developers.google.com/closure/compiler/
[yui-compressor]: http://yui.github.io/yuicompressor/
