---
layout: post
title: Rounding Out The Basics
class: more-js
date: 2014-05-16 00:00:00
---

Today's class covers a few basics that we intentionally skipped along the way.

## Iteration

JavaScript has many built in ways to iterate and loop:

{% highlight javascript %}
['water', 'coffee', 'tea'].forEach(function(beverage) {
  console.log('%s is delicious!', beverage);
});
{% endhighlight %}


{% highlight javascript %}
var array = ['water', 'coffee', 'tea'];
for (var i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
  var beverage = array[i];
  console.log('%s is delicious!', beverage);
}
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight javascript %}
var i = 0;
var array = ['water', 'coffee', 'tea'];
while (i < array.length) {
  var beverage = array[i];
  console.log('%s is delicious!', beverage);
  i++;
}
{% endhighlight %}


## Equality and Type Coercion

The following if statement is truthy:

{% highlight javascript %}
if (false == '0') { /* this is executed */ }
{% endhighlight %}

If `'0'` and `false` are equal, one may expect that the string `'0'` would
always be false. But try this:

{% highlight javascript %}
if ('0') { /* this is executed */ }
{% endhighlight %}

These strange rules have led JavaScript developers to simply favor the `===`
and `!==` operators instead of using `==` and `!=`. JSHint will check for this.

See [this discussion on StackOverflow][so-equality] for more details on
equality and coercion.


## Semicolons

Semicolons at the end of a single line statement can actually be omitted. I
always add them out of habit and for consistency. Most JS programmers add
semicolons everywhere they should be. I recommend that you do the same. If
you're interested in learning more about this, Google for it. But honestly,
just use the semicolons and forget you ever heard this. You'll probably be
better off that way. Seriously.

<aside>
**Religious Viewpoints**

Semicolons and whether or not they're optional in JavaScript is sometimes
debated. Some people are in favor of them. Some people aren't. There are cases
where tools you use may not understand JavaScript properly if they don't
include semicolons at the end of statements. Technically, one can argue that
these tools are broken. But that doesn't stop you from living in a world with
broken tools. I use semicolons for this reason &mdash; I've used broken tools
in the past and it's now habit.

Programmers will often discuss the pros and cons of certain topics to no end.
Text editors are one of those topics. There's no right answer in the case of
text editors.

With semicolons, you're probably less likely to offend the programmer with a
religious viewpoint in favor of using semicolons than you are the one who
omits them. So there may be no right answer, but you're probably safer with
them. Feel free to form your own opinion. It won't bother me. :)
</aside>


## Project

There's no project on the calendar for today. We have some options:

- Ask questions, review previous concepts
- Write more code, return to previous projects, improve and complete them
- Re-work some previous code to use for and while loops
- Move on to new material
- You really want another project?

[so-equality]: http://stackoverflow.com/a/359509/98069
