---
layout: post
title: Callbacks &amp; I/O
class: io
date: 2014-05-19 00:00:00
---

Today we'll start with callbacks and then move on to working with files. This
will allow us to start building more complex applications.

## Callbacks

For now let's think of callbacks as a way of letting you know that something
has completed. We'll get to a more technical definition momentarily.

Let's use an example to illustrate the point. We'll try to write some
code for baking a cake. Here's a starting place.

{% highlight javascript %}
// prep work
preheatOven('350deg');

// make the cake batter
var batter = mix(['flour', 'eggs', 'butter']);
var pan = {
  type: 'pan',
  diameter: '9in',
  shape: 'round'
};
var cake = pour(pan, batter);

// bake the cake
ovenAddItem(cake);
ovenSetTimer('30min');
ovenRemoveItem(cake);

// frost the cake
var frosting = mix(['sugar', 'butter']);
decorate(cake, frosting);
{% endhighlight %}

As it stands, this code won't allow us to accomplish our goal of baking a cake
the way people usually do it. Let's implement some of these functions to get
and idea of why this is.

### Result

We needed to use callbacks to properly write this code. The resulting code
becomes:

{% highlight javascript %}
// prep work
preheatOven('350deg');

// make the cake batter
var batter = mix(['flour', 'eggs', 'butter']);
var pan = {
  type: 'pan',
  diameter: '9in',
  shape: 'round'
};
var cake = pour(pan, batter);
var frosting = null;

// bake the cake
ovenAddItem(cake);
ovenSetTimer('30min', function() {
  ovenRemoveItem(cake);
  decorate(cake, frosting);
});

// frost the cake
frosting =  mix(['sugar', 'butter', 'cocoa powder']);
{% endhighlight %}


A _callback_ is the generic term for a function that's passed as an argument
to another function, usually a long running operation. The callback function
will be called once the long running operation completes.

### Test Driven Development

Mocha is designed to work well out of the box with _asynchronous_, or callback
based functions. Every time you write a test with `it`, you can provide an
additional argument to your function, usually called `done`. `done` is a
function that you should call once everything has been completed. That means
you can call it from your callback.

Let's clear out the definition of `ovenSetTimer` and write a few tests, make
sure that they fail, and work out the definition of `ovenSetTimer` again.

{% highlight javascript %}
describe('ovenSetTimer()', function() {
  it('calls the callback', function(done) {
    ovenSetTimer('0s', done);
  });
});
{% endhighlight %}


### Challenges

Don't forget to use Git and TDD.

- Write a function, `setReminder(date, callback)` that will execute the
  callback at the given time. You'll need [`setTimeout`][node-settimeout] and
  [dates][mdn-dates]. There's also an
  [MDN page on `setTimeout`][mdn-settimeout].
- Create a stopwatch that counts to `10` using `setTimeout`.
- Create a stopwatch that counts to `10` using `setReminder`.
- Use [Lo-Dash][lodash], specifically [`_.range`][lodash-range] and
  [`_.forEach`][lodash-foreach] to create a stopwatch that counts to `10`.
  Try implementing this with both `setTimeout` directly and also with your
  `setReminder` function.
- **Advanced:** Make `setReminder` use strings instead of a date object, so
  you can type `tomorrow at 3pm` or `noon`. This is called _natural language
  processing_. _Natural language processing_ is incredibly, incredibly
  difficult to implement.


## I/O

### Jargon

I/O is short for Input/output. This has meanings in both
computer hardware and software. I/O in software generally refers to
communication with hardware devices, mice, keyboards, monitors, hard drives,
etc.

<aside>
Accessing files via the _file system_ is one form of I/O. Because accessing
files is probably the most common form of I/O, you will hear the term I/O used
when someone is just referring to work they're doing with files.
</aside>

### Speed

I/O is slow. It may not feel that way to you, but to a computer it's _orders of
magnitude_ slower than the code you've written so far. The difference is about
the same as the difference between the speed at which a baby crawls and the
speed of a fighter jet.

What does this mean to you?

It means we shouldn't wait for the I/O. We should continue doing whatever we
can while I/O happens. We use callbacks!

### Reading Files

Here's how you [read a file][node-readfile]:

{% highlight javascript %}
var fs = require('fs');

fs.readFile('./path/to/file', { encoding: 'utf8' }, function(err, contents) {
  console.log(contents);
});
{% endhighlight %}

<aside>
**UTF What?**

_UTF-8_ is a string encoding. That certainly made it a lot clearer. Computers
work with zeros and ones. You've certainly heard that before. These are called
_bits_. Eight bits make up a _byte_. So one byte could be something like
`01100001`. Strings are actually just sequences characters, right? Well each
character is backed by these zeros and ones somehow. Sometimes each character
is represented by a single byte, and there's a one to one mapping between bytes
and characters. The standardized mapping used to do this is called
[ASCII][ascii]. The letter `a`, for instance, is represented by the byte
`01100001`, and `b` by the byte `01100010` (if you've never counted in binary,
that's just `01100001 + 00000001`). It works okay, but has limitation.

One byte is only able to represent 256 (2^8) different options. If
you start mapping out all of the characters you need to represent all of the
languages of the world (plus the emojis), you'll realize you run out pretty
quickly. In fact ASCII only used 7 bits per byte (ask about parity if you're
really into this stuff). So it could only represent 128 characters. That's not
a lot. The Unicode standard (UTF) was introduced to address this limitation.

There are a few versions of the Unicode. They are [UTF-8][utf8],
[UTF-16][utf16], and [UTF-32][utf32]. Each of these specifies the number of
bits that it uses by default. UTF-8 is 8 bits (or 1 byte). UTF-16 is 16 bits
(or 2 bytes). UTF-32 is 32 bits (or 4 bytes). You can read up on them
independently, but the main thing to know is that UTF-8 is the dominant
encoding that supports all of the worlds languages.

UTF-8 is a variable length encoding that's backwards compatible with ASCII.
What this means, is you can read ASCII encoded files by specifying UTF-8. The
variable length encoding means that some characters are represented by more
than one byte (up to 4 bytes). Variable length encodings are somewhat slower to
work with in certain circumstances.

UTF-16 is variable width as well (up to 4 bytes), but incompatible with ASCII.
Don't use it unless you have to.

UTF-32 is fixed width. That means every character is represented by 4 bytes.
This results certain files being four times larger than UTF-8, but has the
advantage that you know the 2,000th character starts at the 8,000th byte
(`2000*4`). Unlike UTF-8 and UTF-16, you don't have to read the first 2,000
characters to know if any of them are represented by multiple bytes. This
_random access_ to characters is only needed in specific applications.

Unicode characters are usually represented in hex, so `a` in UTF-8 is `0x61`
and `z` is `0x7a`.

Why does all of this matter? When you write code, and you don't control the
input, you either need to specify that the input must be a certain encoding
or will need to consider the possibility that the input could be encoded
with any encoding. These are the common encodings, but since the history of
computers goes back pretty far, there are some older encodings, some failed
encodings, and some platform specific encodings that exist. You'll likely never
deal with these.

Obviously, this is a very broad topic. This little bit of information likely
raised a lot of questions. Ask if you'd like to discuss more.
</aside>

### Project

Write an app that takes two arguments, the paths to two different text files.
The app should output all of the words that are used in both files.

<aside class="objective">
{% highlight bash %}
$ ./shared-words --help

  Usage: shared-words [options] <file1> <file2>

  Options:

    -h, --help     output usage information
    -V, --version  output the version number
    -n, --number   Report just the number of words
    -v, --verbose  Be more verbose,
                   report timing information

$ ./shared-words file1.txt file2.txt
programming
code
node
javascript

$ ./shared-words --number file1.txt file2.txt
4 words in common

$ ./shared-words -n -v words1.txt words2.txt
[time] read the files: 3ms
[time] word comparison: 9ms
435 words in common.
{% endhighlight %}
</aside>

We talked about speed earlier, and we know that reading files can be slow.
Let's analyze the performance of the code that we're writing now, though.
How can we do this?

{% highlight javascript %}
var time = function(name) {
  var start = Date.now();
  return function() {
    console.log('[time] %s: %dms', name, Date.now() - start);
  };
};

var done = time('reading file');
fs.readFile('path/to/file', function(err, buffer) {
  done();
});
{% endhighlight %}

Analyze the performance of both reading the files as well as the code that
figures out which words are shared. See which takes longer. Don't include the
actual logging of shared words in how long it takes. Just the part that figures
out which words are shared.

How long does your program take to compare the words [here][github-jsi-words]?
It will depend on the speed of your computer, but it should be less than 100ms.

If you've got some extra time, add an option to, write the files to a file
instead of to the terminal.


### Discussing Performance

Programmers often use [Big O notation][big-o] to discuss the _running time_ of
algorithms. There's a bunch of complex math stuff that goes along with this,
and it's something that you might study more deeply in a CS curriculum. In the
interest of a shared vocabulary, you should understand the basics of Big O so
that when someone says, <q>the running time of that algorithm is N squared, so
we need to find a better solution,</q> you understand what they're talking
about. There's no need to understand the math.

There's a good [beginner's guide][big-o-beginner] that explains the basics.


[node-readfile]: http://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#fs_fs_readfile_filename_options_callback
[node-settimeout]: http://nodejs.org/api/timers.html#timers_settimeout_callback_delay_arg
[mdn-dates]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date
[mdn-settimeout]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window.setTimeout

[lodash]: http://lodash.com
[lodash-range]: http://lodash.com/docs#range
[lodash-foreach]: http://lodash.com/docs#forEach

[ascii]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII
[utf8]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8
[utf16]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-16
[utf32]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-32
[big-o]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_O_notation
[big-o-beginner]: http://rob-bell.net/2009/06/a-beginners-guide-to-big-o-notation/

[github-jsi-words]: https://github.com/portlandcodeschool/jsi-words
